Hello friends in this video let us discuss about the
need for binary heap
let us assume some people are standing in the
hospital in a queue
Now what is the property of the queue The person
who comes first will be sent to the doctor first
But what if a person comes in a serious condition
We need to give him some priority right And he
should visit the doctor first
We can call this as a priority
Queue
That is
Each item in a queue is given some priority and
further dequeue operation will be done based on the
priority
This is also called as priority queues
We can efficiently implement a priority
Queue
Using binary heap Now let us learn what
is a binary Heap binary heap is a complete
binary tree which satisfies the heap ordering property Before discussing
with heap
Let us understand the difference between a full tree and
a complete tree
A full binary
is a tree in which every node other than
the leaves has two Children
See here every node has exactly two Children
Other than the leafs this is called a full tree
Where a complete binary tree is a full tree
in which the last level may contain lesser nodes but
it should be as left as possible
See here the last level is incomplete but the nodes
are as left as possible
So this is called a complete tree in the same
tree
If last level nodes are in the right side leaving
the left side vacant then it is not a complete
tree
The last level nodes should be as left as possible
So the binary heap is a complete tree that is
other than the last level
All levels should be felt completely
We have two kinds of heaps
Min heap and max heap
Here
First letters discuss about Min heap in Min heap every
parent node
Value will be lesser than the Children's Value that is
the parent node will have the minimum value
See this example
This is a min heap tree
We can take any sub tree
It's root will be the minimum value
Take the right sub tree forty is the root and it
is the minimum value in this sub tree
Now take the left sub tree
Twenty is the root and it is the minimum
value and the root of a any min heap will be
the minimum value in that tree
Here
10 is the minimum value in this tree and it is the
root of the tree
So in min heap the node with minimum priority will
be present at the root node so that we can
access the minimum priority node at constant time
Now let us discuss about Max Heap in Max heap
Every parent nodes value will be greater than the Children's
value
That is the parent node will have the maximum value
see this example
This is a Max Heap tree
We can take any sub tree
It's root will be the maximum value
Take the right sub tree
70 is the root and it is the maximum value
in this sub tree
Take the left sub Tree fifty is the root and
it is the maximum value and the root of any
max heap tree will be the maximum value in that
tree
Here 100 is a maximum value in this tree and it is
the root of the tree
So in Max heap the node with maximum priority will be
present at the root nodes so that we can access
the maximum priority node at constant time so today we
have discussed about the need of binary Heap and
we discussed about priority Queue
And we learn that we have two kinds of heaps
min heap and max heap in a min heap
The low priority node will be present at root and
in max heap
The maximum priority node will be present at the root
In the next video we will learn how to construct
a heap in detail.